About Avis
======================================================================

Avis is an event router service compatible with the commercial Elvin
implementation produced by Mantara Software. Avis provides a
general-purpose, high performance (eventually!) publish/subscribe
message bus using content-based subscriptions.

Elvin is a flexible event router that allows arbitrary messages
(a.k.a.  "notifications") to be exchanged via a publish/subscribe
model. Elvin clients subscribe to messages by specifying subscription
expressions that match messages by their content, an approach that
differs from most other message bus systems that operate by selecting
messages published on pre-defined channels. Elvin routers can also be
easily federated to construct high-efficiency, wide-area event
networks.

The name "Avis" stems from the French word "avis", meaning advice or
notification.


Current Status
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Avis is currently at a point where it is usable as a drop-in
replacement for Mantara's `elvind` if quench and federation are not
required (you can still use `ewafd`-style federation).

Future development includes:

 * A Java client library providing the same function as Mantara's
   `je4` library. This will be released under the LGPL.

 * An `ewafd`-style federator to tide users over until real federation
   is implemented.

 * Implementing the "quench" API for allowing producers to discover
   what clients are listening for.


Applications
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Current uses for Elvin include [instant messaging and virtual
presence][tickertape.org], coordination for smart room control and
[distributed speech transcription for meetings][AuTM]. It has also
been used by Mantara for extremely high-volume financial transaction
routing.


History
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Elvin orginated at the [Distributed Systems Technology
Centre][DSTC_wikipedia], a part government, part commercial
Cooperative Research Centre, which operated from 1992 until June,
2006. It was rapidly picked up by DSTC groups and several of DSTC's
partners such as the [Australian Defence Science and Technology
Organisation][DSTO] (DSTO) due to its ability to provide a highly
reliable, fast, federate communication bus suitable for a wide variety
of uses.

Mantara Software was spun off from DSTC as a commercial entity in 2003
to develop Elvin as a product. When Mantara announced it would stop
offering Elvin as a standalone product at the end of 2007, Matthew
Phillips, the author of Avis, began to implement the Elvin open
specifications at [elvin.org][] to allow DSTO and other interested
organisations to continue developing systems using the Elvin message
bus.

[DSTC_wikipedia]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distributed_Systems_Technology_Centre
[DSTO]: http://www.dsto.defence.gov.au
[elvin.org]: http://elvin.org
[AuTM]: http://www.dsto.defence.gov.au/publications/2595/
[tickertape.org]: http://tickertape.org


Contacts
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The author can be contacted at `avis at mattp.name` (replace "at" with
"@") or `phillipsm at users.sourceforge.net`.
